---
title: "PT Implementers' Meeting - October 2020"
modified: 2020-09-07T13:20:02-05:00
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - transport
  - PTIM
  - Conference
  - Virtual
layout: posts

---
Calling all PT developers: We're holding a Pluggable Transport Implementers' Meeting (PTIM) on October 12-16, and we want you to join us! The event will be 100% virtual, and with lots of time for direct interactions with other developers and beneficiaries of your work. We want to make this event as fun, productive and interactive as we can, so that you can get the most out of interactions with your peers and other experts in the world of Pluggable Transports. Each day will be broken down into four one-hour sessions, which will be loosely grouped into these areas:

- Presentations and panels: Hear from some of your colleagues in this field about current trends, responses and how the Pluggable Transports specification is evolving.

- Lightning talks: A series of short, 5-minute presentations and 2-minute pitches for new and existing projects.

- Open discussions / hacking space: Help us set the agenda by proposing topics that matter to you, and guiding the conversations to get what you want out of them.

- Interactive sessions: Join in with other teams working on PT-related projects and agree on common goals.

Your input can help to make this PTIM even better. We’d love to hear from you as we pull the agenda together. Would you like to propose a lightning talk to tell everyone what you’re working on or what you think would make a good project? Is there something you want to work on as a short sprint and would like to get some contribution from the community? Maybe there’s someone working in this space who you want to make sure we’re inviting? Let us know, either via email or via the [RSVP link](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSd778O0ChoPwvilhpSMUvufsfE-6HzkHtG6kO6aDWI8TcQiAg/viewform?usp=sf_link).

We’re looking forward to a fantastic event, and hope to see you there! Please [RSVP here](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSd778O0ChoPwvilhpSMUvufsfE-6HzkHtG6kO6aDWI8TcQiAg/viewform?usp=sf_link) and send us any suggestions for the event or attendee list.